POST OPERATIVE INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPENDECTOMY

Activity 
You will likely feel tired for at least 1 week after your surgery. Take your pain medicine as needed in order to stay active, but rest as needed for recovery. Take short walks 2-3 times a day. This will help reduce the risk of blood clots following surgery. You may use the stairs as needed as long as you are not dizzy or weak. Make sure someone is around the first few times you use the stairs or exercise.

Driving 
Do not drive until you have been seen for your first post-operative clinic office visit. Unless told otherwise, you may drive after your first visit and when you can react safely in an emergency. You must not be taking pain medicines stronger than regular Tylenol® (acetaminophen) at the time you are driving, nor should you have a great deal of pain, as this will affect your ability to react quickly. Also: do not take Tylenol #3 (acetaminophen with codeine) and Tylenol at the same time as Tylenol is in both of them. If you are trying to take yourself off Tylenol #3 by switching to Tylenol, allow 6 hours between doses.

Lifting/Coughing 
Practice 10 deep breaths every hour and 2 coughs every hour, (for at least 12 hours a day), for the first week after surgery. This will decrease your risk of lung problems or pneumonia. Do not lift heavy objects (more than 8 pounds) for the first 4 weeks. Also avoid pushing, pulling or abdominal pressure for these first 4 weeks. When coughing, be sure to place a pillow over the incision and gently press inward to reduce the pressure (from coughing) on your incision.

Incisions 
Your incisions have been closed with dissolvable suture on the inside and a special skin glue over the incision. The skin glue will dissolve on its own. Do not try to remove it from your skin. You may shower the day after surgery and allow clean, soapy water to run over your incision but do not soak your incisions in water (no hot tub, bathtub or swimming pools) for the first 2 weeks after surgery. Do not put any ointment or creams over the incisions for the first 6 weeks after surgery or while the incision is open, draining or scabbed. Place an icepack over your groin area for 20 minutes, 3 times a day for the first 5 days to control pain and decrease inflammation.  
Your incisions are closed with dissolvable sutures and covered with steri‐strips.  The steri‐strips normally last approximately 1‐2 weeks. If they fall off sooner, do not be alarmed.  You can expect each of the incisions to form a hard knot beneath the skin.  Bruising is especially common.  If you notice any areas of increasing warmth or redness, fevers, or chills, please call

Diet 
You may eat the diet you had before surgery. Eat whatever seems to agree with you best. Generally, bland, low-fat foods will settle in your stomach better. Your appetite may be less than normal. Drink lots of fluids

Common problems
• Constipation is to be expected while on narcotic pain medications.   Most patients do not have their first bowel movement until at least 3 days after surgery.  While utilizing narcotics, you should remain on an over the counter stool softener such as colace or docusate.  Fiber supplementation with metaumucil or citrucel (1 tablespoon with 8oz water) is also recommended.  For severe constipation, milk of magnesia (30 ml) or a fleets enema can be helpful.  Do not use the enema if you have any chronic kidney diseases such as renal failure.    
• Pain is a common complaint after laparoscopic or open surgery.  Shoulder pain is an especially frequent complaint after laparoscopic surgery.  A protected heating pad applied to your shoulder can sometimes help with shoulder pain.  It should resolve within 1‐2 days.  Make sure to utilize the prescribed narcotic pain medications as recommended.  If no sensitivity to anti‐inflammatory medications or ulcer history exists, ibuprofen (400‐600mg) every 6‐8 hours is an excellent alternative in addition to or as a substitute to your narcotic.    
• Nausea is a common complaint post op.  This can be associated with narcotic pain medications, general anesthesia, as well as with severe constipation.  Try to minimize your narcotic pain medications as soon as able.  If vomiting, fevers or chills occur, please call the office at 303.449.3642. 

PRECAUTIONS — When Should I call the Physician? 
Diarrhea: Occasional loose bowel movements are not uncommon. However, constant watery diarrhea, especially with fever, can mean there is an infection of the bowels. 
Fever with or without cough: This could be a sign of lung, wound or stomach infection. 
Elevated heart rate: If your heart rate is more than 100 beats per minute, this could be a sign of infection.
 Sudden shortness of breath and/or chest pain: This could be related to a heart problem, such as a heart attack, or could be related to a blood clot to the lung (pulmonary embolus) or a lung infection. 
Leg swelling and pain: Blood clot formation in the leg, particularly if it is on one side, could cause swelling with pain in the calf. 
Passing out: This could be a sign of low blood pressure, which could be caused by blood loss, low blood sugar or other causes. 
Wound drainage: Gold colored drainage is normal. If you develop drainage from your wound that is thick, greenish-brown color, has a foul odor, redness, and/or tenderness, it may be a sign that your wound is infected. Call your doctor.

Follow Up 
You should follow up in the clinic 1 week after your surgery, 2 weeks, and 3 months after your surgery. You may be seen sooner if decided by the surgical team. 
